Chapter 9: MicroProfile Telemetry (#18)
microprofile/microprofile-tutorial: chapter09/index.adoc

For example:

* A user requests order details.
* The API gateway records the root span.
* Child spans are created as the request is forwarded to the order service, which interacts with a database.

==== Context Propagation

*Context propagation* ensures that trace metadata, such as trace IDs and span IDs, travels with requests as they move through different services and threads. This metadata allows spans created in different services to be correlated into a single trace. Context propagation is vital for connecting distributed spans and understanding their relationships. +

In Java, context propagation is often implemented using thread-local variables or libraries like MicroProfile Context Propagation. This ensures that tracing information is maintained seamlessly across thread pools, asynchronous tasks, and service boundaries.

Together, these concepts form the foundation of distributed tracing, enabling developers to monitor, analyze, and optimize the performance of their microservices effectively.

> === Instrumenting MicroProfile Telemetry
> 
> Instrumenting Open Telemetry in an E-commerce Application

Reviewer: I think this should be

```suggestion
=== Instrumenting with MicroProfile Telemetry

Instrumenting an E-commerce Application with MicroProfile Telemetry
```

as we're talking about using MicroProfile Telemetry to instrument an application, not instrumenting MicroProfile Telemetry itself.

> Instrumenting Open Telemetry in an E-commerce Application

Reviewer: This section talks about adding manual instrumentation, but I don't think you've mentioned that MicroProfile Telemetry _automatically_ instruments REST requests which are received or sent using Jakarta REST or MicroProfile REST client.

Configuration is still required to tell MP Telemetry where to send the traces, but users can skip steps 1-5 and still get tracing of their REST requests.

Author: I will be updating about All Three Types of Telementry - Automatic, Manual and Agent based with examples. Working on this, will update shortly.

Author: Updated.

*Step 1: Add the MicroProfile Telemetry Dependency*

First, include the necessary dependencies for MicroProfile Telemetry in your `pom.xml` file. These dependencies enable tracing and exporting of telemetry data.

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile.telemetry</groupId>
  <artifactId>microprofile-opentelemetry-api</artifactId>
  <version>2.0.1</version>
</dependency>
----

*Step 2: Create a Tracer*

A Tracer is used to create spans and manage trace data within the application. Initialize a Tracer instance for your application:

[source, java]
----
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer; 
import io.opentelemetry.api.GlobalOpenTelemetry;

//…
//…

Tracer tracer = TracerFactory.getInstance().getTracer("my-tracer");

> ----

Reviewer 2: Importing `io.opentelemetry.api.GlobalOpenTelemetry` is not necessary or recommended. The spec explicitly states that the class is not required to be supported: https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry/blob/main/spec/src/main/asciidoc/opentelemetry-apis.adoc#opentelemetry-api

I would change this to: 

[source, java]
----
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer; 

@Inject
Tracer tracer;
----

> ----

Author: @Azquelt & @yasmin-aumeeruddy - Agreed, will change this instantiation to use `@Inject` instead.

*Step 3: Create a Span*

Use the Tracer to create a span that represents a specific operation or activity in your application:

[source, java]
----
Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("my-span").startSpan();
----

*Step 4: Add Attributes to the Span*

Attributes provide additional metadata about the span, such as the HTTP method or the resource being accessed. This helps in contextualizing the trace data:

[source, java]
----
span.setAttribute(++"http.method"++, ++"+*+GET+*+"++);
span.setAttribute(++"http.url"++, ++"/products/12345"++);
span.setAttribute(++"user.id"++, ++"98765"++);+
----

*Step 5: End the Span*

When the operation completes, end the span to capture the telemetry data:

[source, java]
----
span.end();

> ----

Author: @Azquelt - Sure, Will fix this with exception handling block as advised above.

> ----

Author: Updated

*Step 6: Export the Traces*

To export traces to a backend like Jaeger, include the exporter dependency and configure the properties: +

Add the Jaeger Exporter Dependency:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
    <artifactId>opentelemetry-exporter-jaeger</artifactId>
    <version>1.34.1</version>
</dependency>
----

*Step 7: Configuration *

Configure the exporter in `application.properties`:

[source, properties]
----
otel.traces.exporter=jaeger
otel.exporter.jaeger.endpoint=http://localhost:14268/api/traces

> ----

Reviewer 2: The default value for `otel.traces.exporter` is OTLP as the exporter is used by default. Additional configuration for the exporter would not be required unless the user wanted to change the `otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint` from `http://localhost:4317` to something else.

> ----

Author: @yasmin-aumeeruddy & @Azquelt - Thanks for pointing this out. Sure will only share about OTLP as a common protocol / configuration for all Trace analysis tools like Zipkin, Jaeger, & Grafana Tempo. Working on this will update this shortly.

> ----

Author: Updated.

=== Context Propagation and Correlation

*Context propagation* refers to the mechanism of carrying trace-related metadata, such as *trace IDs* and *span IDs*, across service and thread boundaries. This ensures that all spans created during a request can be linked together to form a complete trace.

*How it works* 

. *Trace Context*: Metadata that includes the +traceId+, +spanId+, and sampling information.
. *Propagation Mechanisms*: Trace context is typically carried in HTTP headers (e.g., +traceparent+) or message properties in message queues.
. *MicroProfile Integration*: MicroProfile Context Propagation seamlessly integrates with OpenTelemetry to ensure that the trace context is maintained across service calls.

*Example: Propagating Context Across HTTP Requests*

When making an HTTP request, the trace context is propagated using headers:

[source, java]
----
import jakarta.ws.rs.client.Client;
import jakarta.ws.rs.client.ClientBuilder;

Client client = ClientBuilder.newClient();
client.target("http://inventory-service/api/check")
      .request()
      .header("traceparent", "00-4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736-00f067aa0ba902b7-01")
      .get();
----

> In this example, the +traceparent+ header ensures that the trace context is passed to the downstream +inventory-service+.

Reviewer: MicroProfile Telemetry [does this for you automatically](https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-telemetry-2.0.1/microprofile-telemetry-spec-2.0.1.html#sec:automatic-instrumentation) as long as you're using Jakarta REST client or MP REST client.

If you're not using one of those APIs, you may have to do it yourself, but you wouldn't do it like this. Instead you would use the [ContextPropagators interface](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-context/latest/io/opentelemetry/context/propagation/ContextPropagators.html). This allows OpenTelemetry to decide which headers need to be added with what values, but you provide the code to add those headers to the request.

I think for this guide, it's probably important to say that the information is usually carried between services in HTTP headers, for example the `traceparent` header, and that MP Telemetry does this for you for Jakarta REST and MP Rest Client, but then link to the examples in the `ContextPropagators` doc for users who need to integrate with other transport APIs.

==== Correlation

*Correlation* is the process of associating related spans and traces across multiple services and threads to form a cohesive view of a transaction. Correlation enables developers to:

* Identify the source of bottlenecks or errors in distributed systems.

> * Understand the dependencies and interactions between services.

Reviewer: I think there's two important things here which are somewhat separate:
* One trace can include spans from many operations on many services and we collect them together so that the user can see everything that was involved with serving that request.
* Trace IDs can be captured along with logs and metrics (as exemplars) so that developers can match up log messages with their traces, or dig deeper into an individual request that was recorded as a metric (e.g. if you're looking at the metric for 99th percentile request time, you can find a trace of a request which was one of that slowest 1% to investigate why it was so slow).

This section seems to be talking about the first point, but the following sections talk about the second point, but still call it "correlation". It's not wrong, but it is confusing.

==== Trace and Span IDs

* *Trace ID*: A unique identifier shared across all spans in a single trace.
* *Span ID*: A unique identifier for a single span. It is linked to a parent span, forming a hierarchy.

*Example: Correlating Logs with Traces*

By including trace and span IDs in logs, you can correlate logs with traces to gain deeper insights:

[source, java]
----
import org.slf4j.MDC;

MDC.put("traceId", "4bf92f3577b34da6a3ce929d0e0e4736");
MDC.put("spanId", "00f067aa0ba902b7");

log.info("Fetching product details for productId=12345");
----

> When viewing logs, the +traceId+ and +spanId+ allow you to link specific log entries to the corresponding spans in your tracing system.

Reviewer: I'm not familiar with MDC in slf4j, but OpenTelemetry includes support for logging and will capture the current context information automatically when something is logged.

Not being familiar with MDC here, I'm not sure if this example is good to have here, or whether it would be more helpful to talk about OpenTelemetry's native support for logging.

If we did keep the current example, it would probably be helpful to include how to extract the traceId and spanId from the current context.

==== Context Propagation in Asynchronous Flows

> In asynchronous programming, maintaining context across threads is challenging. MicroProfile Context Propagation helps by enabling trace context to be passed seamlessly across asynchronous tasks.

Reviewer: Does MicroProfile Context Propagation actually do this? I don't see a requirement in [either](https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-telemetry-2.0.1/microprofile-telemetry-spec-2.0.1.html) [spec](https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-context-propagation-1.3/microprofile-context-propagation-spec-1.3.html) and it's not one of the context types which has a constant in [ThreadContext](https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-context-propagation-1.3/apidocs/org/eclipse/microprofile/context/ThreadContext.html).

I agree that it would make sense for context propagation to do this automatically, and that it could be implemented as its own context provider, but I'm not sure that it's actually required by the spec as you're suggesting here.

Also worth noting that OpenTelemetry [provides an API](https://www.javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-context/latest/io/opentelemetry/context/Context.html) for propagating its context between threads.

Reviewer 3: There is no integration with MP context propagation in the spec.

==== Best Practices for Context Propagation and Correlation

. *Propagate Context Consistently: *Use standard headers like traceparent for HTTP and custom headers for other protocols.
. *Log Trace Identifiers: *Include trace and span IDs in logs to correlate logs and traces effectively.
. *Use Context Propagation Libraries:* Leverage tools like MicroProfile Context Propagation to simplify the management of context in asynchronous flows.
. *Secure Context Data: *Ensure that trace metadata does not include sensitive information and is transmitted securely.

By leveraging context propagation and correlation, developers can gain a unified view of distributed transactions, enabling effective debugging and optimization of microservices.

=== Analyzing Traces

Once trace data is collected and exported to a backend system, analyzing these traces becomes a crucial step in understanding the behavior of your distributed microservices architecture. By examining traces, you can gain insights into system performance, identify bottlenecks, and detect failures or anomalies.

==== Steps to Analyze Traces

===== 1. Visualizing Traces

> Tracing backends like *Jaeger*, *Zipkin*, or *OpenTelemetry Collector* provide visual interfaces to explore and analyze traces. These tools display traces as timelines or dependency graphs, making it easier to:

Reviewer: I don't believe that OT Collector provides any visual interface.

Author: Updated by replacing OpenTelemetry Collector with Grafana Tempo.

* Visualize which services depend on each other.
* Detects circular dependencies or excessive coupling.
* Plan optimizations by focusing on critical services.

===== 5. Correlating Traces with Logs and Metrics

Traces, when combined with logs and metrics, provide a comprehensive picture of the system:

* *Logs*: Use trace IDs and span IDs in logs to correlate application logs with specific spans.
* *Metrics*: Correlate trace performance data with system metrics like CPU usage, memory consumption, or request rates.
Example: If a span indicates high latency, check corresponding logs and metrics to identify the underlying cause, such as a resource constraint or network delay.

==== Tools for Trace Analysis

===== Jaeger

* Provides detailed timelines for traces.
* Offers a dependency graph visualization.
* Supports searching and filtering based on trace attributes.

=====  Zipkin

* Focuses on simplicity and quick trace searches.
* Integrates with multiple programming languages and tracing libraries.

===== OpenTelemetry Collector

* Centralizes trace collection and routing to different backends.

> * Supports advanced features like sampling and transformation.

Reviewer: This list looks good, but it's certainly not exhaustive. I wonder if it would be helpful to include a list of products which support ingesting trace from OpenTelemetry, as well as these open source packages, or whether that's something we deliberately avoid. I believe Grafana would be another open source option for collecting traces.

Author: @Azquelt - Sure will be updating about using Grafana Tempo as well for Trace Analysis, working on this will complete it in next few days.

Author: Updated

* Retain traces only for the necessary duration for debugging or performance analysis.
* Periodically purge older traces from storage.

===== 4. Access Control and Auditing

Restrict access to trace data to authorized personnel only. Ensure that your tracing backend implements robust authentication and authorization mechanisms.

*Best Practice:*

* Use role-based access control (RBAC) to define permissions for viewing and managing traces.
* Audit access to trace data regularly to identify potential misuse or breaches.

===== 5. Sampling Strategies to Minimize Exposure

Sampling reduces the volume of traces collected and limits the exposure of sensitive data by capturing only a subset of requests. Common strategies include:

* Random Sampling: Captures a fixed percentage of traces.
* Rate-Limiting Sampling: Limits the number of traces per second.
* Key-Based Sampling: Samples traces based on specific attributes (e.g., user ID).

*Example:*

Configure sampling to capture traces for debugging specific operations:

[source, properties]
----
otel.traces.sampler=traceidratio
otel.traces.sampler.traceidratio=0.1

> ----

Reviewer: This is an example of random sampling, not sampling to capture traces for debugging specific operations.

In general, I don't think I'd consider sampling as a good method for avoiding capture of sensitive data - though it is very important for limiting the amount of trace data collected.

Author: Updated the context as suggested

In Java, context propagation is often implemented using thread-local variables or libraries like MicroProfile Context Propagation. This ensures that tracing information is maintained seamlessly across thread pools, asynchronous tasks, and service boundaries.

Together, these concepts form the foundation of distributed tracing, enabling developers to monitor, analyze, and optimize the performance of their microservices effectively.

=== Instrumenting MicroProfile Telemetry

Instrumenting Open Telemetry in an E-commerce Application

*Step 1: Add the MicroProfile Telemetry Dependency*

First, include the necessary dependencies for MicroProfile Telemetry in your `pom.xml` file. These dependencies enable tracing and exporting of telemetry data.

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.eclipse.microprofile.telemetry</groupId>
  <artifactId>microprofile-opentelemetry-api</artifactId>

>   <version>2.0.1</version>

Reviewer 3: This should be 1.1.

. Open the Jaeger UI at http://localhost:16686[http://localhost:16686].
. Search for traces associated with your application and confirm that the telemetry data is visible.

=== Switching to Tracing Providers

MicroProfile Telemetry supports multiple tracing providers, for exporting and analyzing traces. The default tracing provider is Jaeger, but developers can also use other providers such as Zipkin or OpenCensus.

To switch to another tracing provider, replace the Jaeger dependency with the appropriate exporter dependency, such as *Zipkin*, and update the configuration properties accordingly.

=== Context Propagation and Correlation

*Context propagation* refers to the mechanism of carrying trace-related metadata, such as *trace IDs* and *span IDs*, across service and thread boundaries. This ensures that all spans created during a request can be linked together to form a complete trace.

*How it works* 

. *Trace Context*: Metadata that includes the +traceId+, +spanId+, and sampling information.
. *Propagation Mechanisms*: Trace context is typically carried in HTTP headers (e.g., +traceparent+) or message properties in message queues.

> . *MicroProfile Integration*: MicroProfile Context Propagation seamlessly integrates with OpenTelemetry to ensure that the trace context is maintained across service calls.

Author: Removed the section as it was not very much relevant.

==  Agent Instrumentation

Agent Instrumentation enables telemetry data collection without modifying application code by attaching a Java agent at runtime. This approach is particularly useful for legacy applications or scenarios where modifying source code is not feasible. The OpenTelemetry Java Agent dynamically instruments applications, automatically detecting and tracing interactions within commonly used frameworks such as Jakarta RESTful Web Services, database connections, and messaging systems.

One of the key advantages of agent-based instrumentation is that it requires no changes to the application's source code and eliminates the need for recompilation or redeployment. Instead, it can be activated by attaching the agent at application startup.

> Refer to the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/getting-started/ [OpenTelemetry Java Agent Getting Started page] for step-by-step instructions on enabling it for your application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Refer to the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/getting-started/[OpenTelemetry Java Agent Getting Started page] for step-by-step instructions on enabling it for your application.
```

> Refer to the [https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/getting-started/][OpenTelemetry Java Agent Getting Started page] for step-by-step instructions on enabling it for your application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Refer to the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/java/agent/getting-started/[OpenTelemetry Java Agent Getting Started page] for step-by-step instructions on enabling it for your application.
```
